### Radio Frequency Fundamentals
When it comes to radio, visualizing the physical medium and direction of signals becomes more difficult because it’s invisible energy traveling through empty space. Because of this significant difference, you need to take a moment to understand the mysterious properties of radio waves. Don’t worry—the math is easy, and you don’t need a physics background. Just as you don’t need to have a degree in electrical engineering to use twisted-pair Ethernet, you don’t need to understand the physics behind radio theory to manage a wireless network. The underlying theory behind radio is complex, so it will be necessary for you to simply accept and memorize some information even if you don’t completely understand it. What’s most important is that you can apply what you learn.

When I was 16, I began studying to get my amateur radio license. During my studies, one thing that stood out to me was the different ways people would conceptualize radio waves. One person would compare them to waves on the water, whereas another would liken them to sound waves traveling through the air. These comparisons always left me with the obvious nagging question: what’s a radio wave made of? After all, every other sort of wave is made of something. A sound wave is made of vibrating air molecules, and a water wave is made of water molecules. In these cases, a wave is a bunch of particles bumping into one another in such a way as to create a wave pattern and motion. Even a visible light wave is made up of subatomic particles called photons that vibrate at a certain frequency. But a radio wave turns out to be fundamentally different.

### Frequency and Amplitude 
Photons are what actually carry all forms of electromagnetic energy, from microwaves to visible light to X-rays. Radio waves use electromagnetic energy, but a radio wave is fundamentally different than a wave on the ocean or a light wave. A radio wave has two components: frequency or wavelength and amplitude, often represented in a graph as shown in Figure 4.1. Frequency or wavelength is the measured change in electromagnetic energy within a specific time period called a cycle. In the following section I will explain that concept further.

### Frequency
Frequency is measured in Hertz (Hz), what used to be called cycles-per-second (cps). To simplify things, visualize a radio wave as a burst of a cloud of photons emanating from an antenna and moving outward at roughly the speed of light (the exact direction depends on the design of the antenna). Photons are carriers of electromagnetic energy, so you may also think of photons as simply energy if you prefer. Each burst of photons is a single wave. The number of waves that are emitted per second is called the frequency. The number of photons emitted in each burst is the amplitude.

### Amplitude
The amplitude of a signal measures the power of a radio wave at a given point in space. The strength of a radio signal is proportional to the photon density. As the waves move farther from the transmitter, the amplitude decreases. A receiver standing right next to the transmitter will get hit with a lot more photons—and hence a lot more energy—than a receiver 10 miles away. The farther away you are, the fewer photons you can receive, and the weaker the signal will be. Signal strength decreases with distance. You can visualize a radio wave as a flashing beacon light sitting atop a high tower. If the beacon flashes once every second, its frequency is 1 Hz. The brightness of the beacon is the amplitude. You could say that the beacon is a radio station transmitting at a certain frequency. If this sounds simple, it’s because it really is. The complexity of radio waves comes into play when you use them to transmit data. More on that in a moment, but first, let’s get a clearer handle on the significance of frequency. Imagine you’re viewing the beacon through dense fog at night. The brightness is such that you can barely make out the flashes, and you can’t see the bulb or tower at all. Suddenly, the flashes start coming at a different frequency: twice every second. What happened? Here are a few possibilities: 

* The beacon increased its frequency to 2 Hz.
* A pirate beacon appeared next to the first one and began operating at 1 Hz. 
* A pirate beacon appeared next to the first one and began operating at 2 Hz. 

Or it could be a combination of these, such as both beacons flashing at 2 Hz in perfect sync. The same dilemma occurs with radio frequencies, and it’s why in many cases laws forbid different radio stations from operating on the same or similar frequencies unless they’re separated by a sufficient distance. If it were the case that a pirate were operating a second beacon at the same 1 Hz frequency, we’d have a case of interference, and it would be impossible to distinguish the pirate beacon from the legitimate one. On the other hand, if you could reasonably assume that no pirate beacon was operating on the same frequency, then we’d know that our beacon simply increased its frequency to 2 Hz.

### Carrier Frequency
Now that you understand how radio waves function, let’s turn to how you use them to send information. The concept of carrier frequency is the foundation of all radio transmissions. Essentially, the carrier frequency is what carries data. Both the sender and the receiver must be tuned into the same carrier frequency to be able to communicate. To view it another way, the carrier frequency is a clocking mechanism that allows a receiver to stay in sync with the sender so that it’s able to properly decode what the sender’s sending. To illustrate how it works, we’ll construct a scenario using the beacon analogy. Imagine that you need to use a fl ashing beacon to transmit digital data. To keep things simple, let’s assume the only symbols you need to transmit are 0 and 1. The fi rst thing you must do is decide on a carrier frequency. Suppose you choose a carrier frequency of 2 Hz so that the beacon fl ashes twice every second when no data is being sent. To encode data using your beacon, you have two options; you can encode signals by modifying the frequency of the beacon or by modifying the brightness of it. These correspond to frequency modulation (FM) and amplitude modulation (AM), respectively.

### Frequency Modulation (FM)
To encode data using FM, you could lower the frequency by 1 Hz to encode a 0, while increasing it by 1 Hz to encode a 1. Hence, a frequency of 3 Hz indicates a 1, and a frequency of 1 Hz indicates a 0. Using this scheme, imagine that a receiver sees three fl ashes in a second (3 Hz), followed by a single fl ash a second later (1 Hz), and then two fl ashes every second thereafter (2 Hz). Because the receiver knows the carrier is 2 Hz, it simply compares the frequencies of the received signals to the carrier frequency and decodes the information accordingly. The received bits are 1 and 0, followed by no more data. Notice that the throughput potential of this approach is quite limited. We can’t transmit more than one bit per second. When used with digital data, frequency modulation is called frequency-shift keying (FSK) .

### 